[PyOV][DOCS] Python API contribution and developer guide (#12145)
openvinotoolkit/openvino: src/bindings/python/docs/code_examples.md

# Examples of OpenVINO:tm: Python API code
<!-- Do we keep it as is? -->

#### Prerequisites
<!-- Do we keep it here? -->
*To be added...*

##### Enviroment
<!-- Link to enviroment setup -->
*To be added...*

##### Building
<!-- Link to building instructions -->
*To be added...*

### Different ways of extending OpenVINO:tm: Python API

###### Before start: Project's naming conventions

> General guide:

Reviewer: I'm not sure if that true but looks like naming convention is like [PEP8 naming convention](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#naming-conventions)?

Maybe mention it here and write what is a different from this standard?

In PEP there is also mention about styles:
* UPPERCASE
* UPPER_CASE_WITH_UNDERSCORES
etc.

In what cases we can used here or maybe is not allowed at all.

Author: I forgot that PEP8 actually mentioned it, thank you for a pointer!

* Snake case is used across the code. That includes modules (`runtime`, `offline_transformations`), function names and arguments/varaibles (`async_infer`, `wait`, `path_to_xml`).

> * Exception to above rule is naming of classes. For example: `Core`, `InferRequest` and `AsyncInferQueue` start each word with a capital letter.

Reviewer 2: In the line above you used the term "snake case". I think, that you could use the term "camel case" when describing the style for classes.

> * If bindings (term explained later in section "Pure pybind11 solution" <!-- Add link to section? https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2822089/how-to-link-to-part-of-the-same-document-in-markdown -->) are created to already existing C++ code, try to get close to their C++ counterpart with names and placement (example: C++'s `ov::InferRequest` and Python's `openvino.runtime.InferRequest`). If aligement is not possible, try to describe your class/function/module in the best way. One of the examples is pair of `openvino.runtime.ConstOutput/openvino.runtime.Output` which relates to `ov::Output<const ov::Node>/ov::Output<ov::Node>`, this naming points out to functional difference between both classes - first is immutable version and second is mutable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If bindings (term explained later in section "Pure pybind11 solution" <!-- Add link to section? https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2822089/how-to-link-to-part-of-the-same-document-in-markdown -->) are created to expose existing C++ code, try to get close to their C++ counterpart with names and placement (example: C++'s `ov::InferRequest` and Python's `openvino.runtime.InferRequest`). If alignment is not possible, try to describe your class/function/module in the best way. One of the examples is pair of `openvino.runtime.ConstOutput/openvino.runtime.Output` which relates to `ov::Output<const ov::Node>/ov::Output<ov::Node>`, this naming points out the functional difference between both classes - the first is immutable version and the second is mutable.
```

<!-- Pure Python solution describes Python based approach -->
#### Pure Python solution
One of the simplest way to extend existing codebase is by writing it in pure Python.

###### Before start: Layout of the project

> How is OpenVINO:tm: packaging working? It is strictly connected to the layout of the Python API itself and reused in different supporting packages like tools and extensions. Main namespace `openvino` provides unified place that connects all packages together during importing, **this is the required part**. However, it is up to the developer how to organize the rest of the package. There are also other common namespaces which follows same rules:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How does OpenVINO:tm: packaging work? It is strictly connected to the layout of the Python API itself and reused in different supporting packages like tools and extensions. The main namespace `openvino` provides unified place that connects all packages together during importing, **this is the required part**. However, it is up to the developer how to organize the rest of the package. There are also other common namespaces which follow the same rules:
```

>>> "Hello! Let's work on OV together!"
```

##### Extending of existing API (sub)modules
But how to extend existing API? Let's navigate to `openvino/src/bindings/python/src/openvino` and add something to project helpers. Create new directory and fill it's contents:

```
openvino/
    frontend/
    helpers/                        <-- Working directory
        __init__.py
        custom_module/              <-- New directory
            __init__.py             <-- New file
            custom_helpers.py       <-- New file
        packing.py
    ...
    runtime/
    test_utils/
    __init__.py
    utils.py
```

Let's add in `custom_module/custom_helpers.py`:
```python
def top1_index(results: list) -> int:
    return results.index(max(results))
```

Import it to new module in `custom_module/__init__.py`:
```python
from openvino.helpers.custom_module.custom_helpers import top1_index
```

Follow it with correct import in `helpers/__init__.py`:
```python
from openvino.helpers.custom_module import top1_index
```
**Do not forget to include a license on the top of each file!** For demonstrational puroposes (and to keep this markdown file short) it is not included in above snippets.

> To see changes taking effect, rebuild project (Cmake's install step should be good enough) and run your solution:

Reviewer 2: What about putting here a link to the building tutorial?

Author: Will do when `BUILDING.md` will be updated, good idea!

> To see changes taking effect, rebuild project (Cmake's install step should be good enough) and run your solution:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To see changes taking effect rebuild the project (CMake's install step should be good enough) and run your solution:
```

```python
import openvino.helpers as ov_helpers

ov_helpers.top1_index([0.7, 2.99, 3.0, -1.0])
>>> 2
```

Following this method developers can add new modules and adjust existing ones including structure, naming and imported functions.
<!-- !!!!!!!!Mention about adding it to setup.py as well!!!!!!!! -->

<!-- Pure pybind11 solution describes C++ based approach -->

#### Pure pybind11 solution
Second approach to extend OpenVINO:tm: codebase is utilizing *pybind11* library. It allows to write C++ based code, thus creating so-called Python bindings.

**The example in this section covers the scenario of adding new features to newly created submodule. Extending existing codebase can be done in similar fashion by working on already implemented classes and modules.**

###### Before start: What is pybind11?

> <!-- Do we keep it here? -->

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that this is a good idea to keep it here :)

Link to offical documentation: https://pybind11.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
Link to project repository: https://github.com/pybind/pybind11

##### Adding new (sub)module
Adding new module could be done only by using *pybind11* built-in capabilities.

Navigate to main project file responsible for creation of whole package, let's call it "registering-point":

    openvino/src/bindings/python/src/pyopenvino/pyopenvino.cpp

Add new submodule by writing:
```cpp
py::module mymodule = m.def_submodule("mymodule", "My first feature - openvino.runtime.mymodule");
```
This is a shorthand way of adding new submodules which can later be used to extend package. The mysterious `m` is actaully the main OpenVINO:tm: module called `pyopenvino` -- it is registered with `PYBIND11_MODULE(pyopenvino, m)` at the top of the "registering-point" file. Later imports from it are done by calling upon `openvino.pyopenvino` package.

> Please keep in mind, in most of real-life scenarios, modules and classes are registered in different files. General idea is to create helper function that will hold all of the registered modules, classes and functions. This function needs to be exposed within a separate header file and included in "registering-point". Project's common guideline suggest to use names in the following convention `reg[class|module]_[domain]_[name_of_the_class|module]`. Where optional `[domain]` generally points to parts of the API like graph, frontend or stay empty in case of core runtime. Examples can be found in "registering-point" file `openvino/src/bindings/python/src/pyopenvino/pyopenvino.cpp`.

Reviewer 2: What does the sign " | " mean? Is it an alternative? In my opinion splitting `reg[class|module]_[domain]_[name_of_the_class|module]` to the `reg[class]_[domain]_[name_of_the_class] or reg[module]_[domain]_[name_of_the_module]` will be more readable.

Author: Good idea!

        py::print(self._tensor.data<float>() + i);
    }
});
```

**Don't forget to rebuild the project** and test it out:
```python
import openvino.pyopenvino.mymodule as mymodule
a = mymodule.MyTensor([1,2,3])
a.say_hello()
>>> Hello there!
>>> 1.0
>>> 2.0
>>> 3.0
a.say_hello("New message!")
>>> New message!
>>> 1.0
>>> 2.0
>>> 3.0
# Let's try different message
a.say_hello(777)
>>> Traceback (most recent call last):
>>>   File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
>>> TypeError: say_hello(): incompatible function arguments. The following argument types are supported:
>>>     1. (self: openvino.pyopenvino.mymodule.MyTensor) -> None
>>>     2. (self: openvino.pyopenvino.mymodule.MyTensor, arg0: str) -> None
>>> 
>>> Invoked with: <openvino.pyopenvino.mymodule.MyTensor object at >>> 0x7fdfef5bb4f0>, 777
```
Notice that only functions with correct arguments are **not** throwing exceptions. It is helpful to combine this method with your code when binding templated or multi-argument functions. Most of the time (but not always!), using this approach saves a lot of written code, reducing `if-else/switch-case` blocks to minimum and thus making code cleaner and easier to understand.

> <!-- Link do one of our classes? --->

Reviewer 2: Link *to ...

Author: Link do-be-do-be-doo

    __init__.py         <-- Unified file between all packages
    mymodule/           <-- This is your new module and it's contents:)
        __init__.py
        ...
        myclass.py
```

Now let's add it to your exisiting `PYTHONPATH` (replace `[your_path]` with correct path to the OpenVINO:tm: project):

    export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:[your_path]/openvino/src/bindings/python/docs/examples/

Test how it works:

```python
import openvino.mymodule as ov_module

obj = ov_module.MyClass()
obj.say_hello()
>>> "Hello! Let's work on OV together!"
```

##### Extending of existing API (sub)modules
But how to extend existing API? Let's navigate to `openvino/src/bindings/python/src/openvino` and add something to project helpers. Create new directory and fill it's contents:

```
openvino/
    frontend/
    helpers/                        <-- Working directory
        __init__.py
        custom_module/              <-- New directory
            __init__.py             <-- New file
            custom_helpers.py       <-- New file
        packing.py
    ...
    runtime/
    test_utils/
    __init__.py
    utils.py
```

Let's add in `custom_module/custom_helpers.py`:
```python

> def top1_index(results: list) -> int:

Reviewer 4: It could be renamed to `argmax` to make the functions purpose obvious from the start, without looking at its body to make sure. Technically argmax can return a set of points instead of a single index (so it may not be a precise name), so it's up to your decision.

Author: I didn't consider `argmax` as a name since it would conflict with numpy function. I would like to keep it as-is.

cls.def(py::init([](std::vector<float>& list) {
                auto tensor = ov::Tensor(ov::element::f32, ov::Shape({list.size()}));
                std::memcpy(tensor.data(), &list[0], list.size() * sizeof(float));
                return MyTensor(tensor);
            }),
        py::arg("list"),
        R"(
            MyTensor's constructor.

            :param list: List to create new `MyTensor` from.
            :type list: list
        )");

// Binds class function directly
cls.def("get_size", &MyTensor::get_size,
        R"(
            Get MyTensor's size.
        )");

// Adds function only on pybind's layer -- this function will become exclusive to Python API
cls.def("say_hello", [](const MyTensor& self) {
            py::print("Hello there!");
            for (size_t i = 0; i < self.get_size(); i++) {
                py::print(self._tensor.data<float>() + i);
            }
        },
        R"(
            Say hello and print contents of Tensor.
        )");
```

*Tip: To add a function on the module's level as a "free function", simply define it on the module's object:*
```cpp
mymodule.def("get_smile", []() {
    py::print(":)");
});
```

> **Don't forget to rebuild the project** and test it out:

Reviewer 4: Would being explicit about rebuilding AND reinstalling the project (`make install` is required for Python changes to be applied) be beneficial? Without `make install` the contributor could get confused, not noticing new behavior in Python.

Author: Yeah... actually it will depend on `BUILDING.md` instructions, so I am going to keep this comment unresolved and get back to it as soon as Building Guide PR starts.

        # Otherwise raise an error
        raise TypeError("Unsupported argument type!")
```

Finally, import it in the same place as in a previous section, but this time use improved version:
```python
from openvino.runtime.mymodule_ext import MyTensor
```

**Don't forget to rebuild the project** and test it out:
```python
import openvino.runtime as ov

a = ov.MyTensor([1,2,3])             # Notice that initializers are preserved from pybind class
a.say_hello()
>>> Hello there!
>>> 1.0
>>> 2.0
>>> 3.0

a.say_hello("I know how to make new features!")
>>> I know how to make new features! # String takes effect!
>>> 1.0
>>> 2.0
>>> 3.0
>>> 0                                # Correct return!

a.say_hello(8)
>>> 8                                # String conversion takes effect!
>>> 1.0
>>> 2.0
>>> 3.0
>>> 'Converted int to string!'       # Correct return!

a.say_hello(2)
>>> 3

a.say_hello([1,2,3])
>>> Traceback (most recent call last):
>>>   File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
>>>   File ".../openvino/runtime/mymodule_ext.py", line 20, in say_hello
>>>     raise TypeError("Unsupported argument type!")
>>> TypeError: Unsupported argument type!
```

> Great! Now the class has gone a full cricle, from C++ to Python (and again to Python). Such aliasing is a common technique in the project and gives a lot of power to the developer. With easy to understand code, `say_hello` function is now able to dispatch arguments based on their type and apply necessary preprocessing to feed data into the function. However, this could be done in "few more lines of C++" as well, where is the tricky part? The difficult feat of returning different types based on same argument type is achived (look at the dispatching of integer arguments).

Author: Good catch! I doubted it myself at some point... 😄Let's keep your suggestion, I like it even more.
